Add Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector integration guide (#4739)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/operations/observability/tracing/otel-collector/open-telemetry-collector-dynatrace.md

---
type: docs
title: "Using Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector to collect traces to send to Dynatrace"
linkTitle: "Using the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector"
weight: 1000
description: "How to push trace events to Dynatrace, using the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector."
---

> Dapr integrates with the [Dynatrace Collector](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector) using the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP). This guide walks through an example using Dapr to push traces to Dynatrace, using the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dapr integrates with the [Dynatrace Collector](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector) using the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP). This guide walks through an example using Dapr to push traces to Dynatrace, using the Dynatrace version of the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

Reviewer: Can we also add a link somewhere to the dynatrace otel collector to showcase its not the same one as the oss version?

## Prerequisites

- [Install Dapr on Kubernetes]({{< ref kubernetes >}})

> - Access to a Dynatrace tenant and an API token with `openTelemetryTrace.ingest`, `metrics.ingest`, and `logs.ingest` scopes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to a Dynatrace tenant and an API token with `openTelemetryTrace.ingest`, `metrics.ingest`, and `logs.ingest` scopes
- Helm 
```

## Set up Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector to push to your Dynatrace instance

> 

Reviewer: To push traces to your Dynatrace instance, install the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector on your Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: Add this line to make it obvious we dont have local docs for this

1. Create a Kubernetes secret with your Dynatrace credentials:

   ```sh
   kubectl create secret generic dynatrace-otelcol-dt-api-credentials \
     --from-literal=DT_ENDPOINT=https://YOUR_TENANT.live.dynatrace.com/api/v2/otlp \
     --from-literal=DT_API_TOKEN=dt0s01.YOUR_TOKEN_HERE
   ```

   Replace `YOUR_TENANT` with your Dynatrace tenant ID and `YOUR_TOKEN_HERE` with your Dynatrace API token.

> 1. Use the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector distribution for better defaults and support. Download and inspect the [`collector-helm-values.yaml`](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-otel-collector/blob/main/config_examples/collector-helm-values.yaml) file. This is based on the [k8s enrichment demo](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector/use-cases/kubernetes/k8s-enrich#demo-configuration) and includes Kubernetes metadata enrichment for proper pod/namespace/cluster context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Use the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector distribution for better defaults and support than the open source version. Download and inspect the [`collector-helm-values.yaml`](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-otel-collector/blob/main/config_examples/collector-helm-values.yaml) file. This is based on the [k8s enrichment demo](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector/use-cases/kubernetes/k8s-enrich#demo-configuration) and includes Kubernetes metadata enrichment for proper pod/namespace/cluster context.
```

Reviewer: I understand we don't want to link our to the dynatrace docs like 100 times but we want to provide a bit of context on how this is related to Dapr tracing, is the https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector/use-cases/kubernetes/k8s-enrich#demo-configuration link the best step by step guide to set the dynatrace otel col up?

Author: As a starting point yes, although there is a dedicated collector install guide here -  https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry/collector/deployment#kubernetes--helm, it comes with no enrichment

> 1. Deploy the Dynatrace Collector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Deploy the Dynatrace Collector with Helm.
```

   ```sh
   helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
   helm repo update
   helm upgrade -i dynatrace-collector open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector -f collector-helm-values.yaml
   ```

## Set up Dapr to send traces to the Dynatrace Collector

> 

Reviewer: Create a Dapr configuration file to enable tracing and send traces to the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector.

> 1. Create a Dapr configuration file to enable tracing and send traces to the Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector. Ensure the `endpointAddress` points to your Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector service in the cluster. If deployed in the `default` namespace, it's typically `dynatrace-collector.default.svc.cluster.local`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the following file to ensure the `endpointAddress` points to your Dynatrace OpenTelemetry Collector service in your Kubernetes cluster. If deployed in the `default` namespace, it's typically `dynatrace-collector.default.svc.cluster.local`.  
```

> **Important:** Ensure the `endpointAddress` does NOT include the `http://` prefix to avoid URL encoding issues:

Reviewer: Some weird spacing here - nit but make sure its tabbed under the number in the md file.

   ```

1. Apply the configuration with:

   ```sh
   kubectl apply -f collector-config-otel.yaml
   ```

## Deploy your app with tracing

Apply the `tracing` configuration by adding a `dapr.io/config` annotation to the Dapr applications that you want to include in distributed tracing, as shown in the following example:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  ...
spec:
  ...
  template:
    metadata:
      ...
      annotations:
        dapr.io/enabled: "true"
        dapr.io/app-id: "MyApp"
        dapr.io/app-port: "8080"
        dapr.io/config: "tracing"
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
If you are using one of the Dapr tutorials, such as [distributed calculator](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/tutorials/distributed-calculator), you will need to update the `appconfig` configuration to `tracing`.
{{% /alert %}}

You can register multiple tracing exporters at the same time, and the tracing logs are forwarded to all registered exporters.

That's it! There's no need to include any SDKs or instrument your application code. Dapr automatically handles the distributed tracing for you.

## View traces

> Deploy and run some applications. After a few minutes, you should see tracing logs appearing in your Dynatrace tenant:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy and run some applications. After a few minutes, you should see traces appearing in your Dynatrace tenant:
```

> 1. Navigate to **Search > Distributed tracinng** in your Dynatrace UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to **Search > Distributed tracing** in your Dynatrace UI.
```

> 2. Filter by service names to see your Dapr applications  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Filter by service names to see your Dapr applications and their associated tracing spans.
```

<img src="/images/open-telemetry-collector-dynatrace-traces.png" width=1200 alt="Dynatrace showing tracing data.">

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
Only operations going through Dapr API exposed by Dapr sidecar (for example, service invocation or event publishing) are displayed in Dynatrace distributed traces.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert title="Disable OneAgent daprd monitoring" color="warning" %}}

> If you are running Dynatrace OneAgent in your cluster, you should exclude the `daprd` container from OneAgent monitoring to prevent interferences in this configuration, excluding them prevents any injection attempts that could break functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Dynatrace OneAgent in your cluster, you should exclude the `daprd` sidecar container from OneAgent monitoring to prevent interferences in this configuration. Excluding it prevents any automatic injection attempts that could break functionality or result in confusing traces.
```

Add this annotation to your application deployments or globally in your dynakube configuration file:

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    dapr.io/enabled: "true"
    dapr.io/app-id: "MyApp"
    dapr.io/app-port: "8080"
    dapr.io/config: "tracing"

>     container.inject.dynatrace.com/daprd: "false"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    container.inject.dynatrace.com/daprd: "false" # Exclude dapr sidecar from being auto-monitored by OneAgent
```

```
{{% /alert %}}

## Related links
- Try out the [observability quickstart](https://github.com/dapr/quickstarts/tree/master/tutorials/observability/README.md)
- Learn how to set [tracing configuration options]({{< ref "configuration-overview.md#tracing" >}})
- [Dynatrace OpenTelemetry documentation](https://docs.dynatrace.com/docs/ingest-from/opentelemetry)

> - Enrich traces with Kubernetes metadata [Enrich from Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enrich OTLP telemetry data [with Kubernetes metadata
```
